So the first student enrollment and how it happened. essentially propective students so the advertisement online on social media platforms and it led to the aerojet academy website where they could apply with their details and cv and cover letter. so initially the academy staff used bamboo hr to organize everything. after the initail application of students, i think they used the bamboo hr suite to sort outa and filter the best prospective students and also select them based on the backgorunds of studens they need. before the selecting though, during the application, students had to take uptitude tests and the results were factored into the selection. it was all directed for Aircraft Licensed Engineers/Technicians. i was to have all that in house, maybe a subdomain or just a really good logical flow on the website that is secured and wont tolerate abuse by the applicant but will ensure they are properly tested for the best results. admin will be able to edit all the tests. the tests had an interactive screen where applicants had to some some math calculation, it tested some basic english language skills, basic engineering understanding and more. there was a warning before the start of the aptitude test so once started, the screen maximised so applicants cannot switch screens and cheat and it came with a timer too. admin should be able to cutomize it all. so after the application, there was an email sent to confirm the received application. then we waited for the academy to get back on the shortlisted people. we then were scheduled to have an in-person meeting. the scheduler was able to give days and time periods for every applicant to choose. so for example i could choose monday at  12pm to 1pm or 2pm depending on the period set by the admin in the scheduler and assuming no one had chosen. i could also change my meeting date to another even after selecting it if i realized i wont be available. but there were limits to it. also there were limits to the number of people that could be interviewed daily. admin could edit that. so admin can select the days, the time periods for the interviews. after the interviews that was it. we waited for them to get back to use on the final list of selected people. we only got emails congratulating with next steps us if we were through or a rejection email with reason. the next steps were a schedule also for the medicals and how much we had to pay for it and the location. we also had the option to do the medicals with our own health facility if we didnt want the one organized by the academy. all the health data and medicals were updated and sent to us on our dreamclass.io portal. we could then see our academic year, our mates, instructors, notifications, messages and more. this is what we want to build on this aerojet academy project. design the best way to do this in future. you could add more recommendations or suggestions to the plan whenever they arise