personal summary of the portal system

i want to structure the building of the portal such that it implements all the core features and functions and also ensures that the academic year and semesters are implemented, course categories are implements, course under main categories and the same courses that could be under other categories are implemented, for example, the main category is easa part 66 courses, which has under is Modules 1-17 with some modules having and A and B part which simply means the  A is the MCQ exam and the B is the essay exam but the student will essentially study just one module but write two exams under the same module. also understanding that there are license categories that students much choose and a students may be studying for two  or three license categories. all categories have core modules to study and complete so if students decide to do two categories at a time, the will save time by learning all the core module for both categories one time, and also write the exams one time, but will have to study and write the exams for the license category specific/specialized modules to be able to apply for the easa license. also to understand that aerojet provides different study paths. full time which has payment milestone because most student cannot afford the full fees at ago, so the full time is broken down into 4 year full time which ensure the students get enrolled in all the required courses for the license category they are choosing, and enrolling in the courses means they get to write the exams for all the courses too but the 4 year full time courses are studied within a two year period, 1st year two semesters and the 2nd year two semesters, or how ever the admin wants to break it into. also the number or courses and the order in which they are studied are fully implemented by the admin/staff. the next two years is for the OJT which would be carried out in aerojet's live aircraft facility. the same idea applies for the 2 year full time pathway, the only difference is the OJT experience is not added to the package and students only get to study for the two years and write the exams, and receive any other support during those two year periods. there is the military one year pathway too where the courses are completed withing a one year period (accelerated) because it is assumed the personnel have some experience already and want to learn and write the easa exams so they can apply for an easa exams. in all these routes/pathways, the students choose a license category they want to apply for and the required courses are automatically enrolled in for them to finish within the time frame of the pathway. there is also the modular route where some students may have started some of the courses and written exams but may not have finished all and would like to come and study and write the exams with aerojet. they can book individual courses of the easa modules and pay for them to start tuition and write the exams when the exam period is reached. there i also the exam only route where some students have already studied in another facility or self studies and want to only write the exams with aerojet academy. they can then book the exams based on the pooling system described and then write it in the time frame available. they also have access to the course material but no tuition as all the other pathways.