Sub Module 1
GENERAL COMPOSITION OF MATTER
Matter
Matter can be defined as anything that has mass and has volume and is the substance of which physical objects are composed. Essentially, it is anything that can be touched. Mass is the amount of matter in a given object. Typically, the more matter there is in an object the more mass it will have. Weight is an indirect method of determining mass but not the same. The difference between mass and weight is that weight is determined by how much something or the fixed mass is pulled by gravity. Categories of matter are ordered by molecular activity. The four categories or states are: solids, liquids, gases, and plasma. For the purposes of the aircraft technician, only solids, liquids, and gases are considered. 
ELEMENTS
An element is a substance that cannot be reduced to a simpler form by chemical means. Iron, gold, silver, copper, and oxygen are examples of elements. Beyond this point of reduction, the element ceases to be what it is.
COMPOUNDS
A compound is a chemical combination of two or more elements. Water is one of the most common compounds and is made up of two hydrogen atoms and one oxygen atom.
MOLECULES
The smallest particle of matter that can exist and still retain its identity, such as water (H20), is called a molecule. Substances composed of only one type of atom are called elements. But most substances occur in nature as compounds, that is, combinations of two or more types of atoms. It would no longer retain the characteristics of water if it were compounded of one atom of hydrogen and two atoms of oxygen. If a drop of water is divided in
two and then divided again and again until it cannot be divided any longer, it will still be water.
ATOMS
The atom is considered to be the most basic building block of all matter. Atoms are composed of three subatomic particles. These three sub-atomic particles are: protons, neutrons, and electrons. These three particles will determine the properties of the specific atoms. Elements are substances composed of the same atoms with specific properties. Oxygen is an example of this.
The main property that defines each element is the number of neutrons, protons, and electrons. Hydrogen and helium are examples of elements. Both of these elements have neutrons, protons, and electrons but differ in the number of those items. This difference alone accounts for the variations in chemical and physical properties of these two different elements. There are over 100 known elements in the periodic table, and they are categorized according to their properties on that table. The kinetic theory of matter also states that the particles that make up the matter are always moving. Thermal expansion is considered in the kinetic theory and explains why matter contracts when it is cool and expands when it is hot, with the exception of water/ice.
ELECTRONS, PROTONS, AND NEUTRONS
At the center of the atom is the nucleus, which contains the protons and neutrons. The protons are positively charged particles, and the neutrons are a neutrally charged particle. The neutron has approximately the same mass as the proton. The third particle of the atom is the electron that is a negatively charged particle with a very small mass compared to the proton. The proton's mass is approximately 1 837 times greater than the electron. Due to the proton and the neutron location
in the central portion of the atom (nucleus) and the electron's position at the distant periphery of the atom, it is the electron that undergoes the change during chemical reactions. Since a proton weighs approximately 1845 times as much as an electron, the number of protons and neutrons in its nucleus determines the overall weight of an atom. The weight of an electron is not considered in determining the weight of an atom. Indeed, the nature of electricity cannot be defined clearly because it is not certain whether the electron is a negative charge with no mass (weight) or a particle of matter with a negative charge. Hydrogen represents the simplest form of an atom. At the nucleus of the hydrogen atom is one proton and at the outer shell is one orbiting electron. At a more complex level is the oxygen atom, which has eight electrons in two shells orbiting the nucleus with eight protons and eight neutrons. When the total positive charge of the protons in the nucleus equals the total negative charge of the electrons in orbit around the nucleus, the atom is said to have a neutral charge. 
ELECTRON SHELLS AND ENERGY LEVELS
Electrons require a certain amount of energy to stay in an orbit. This particular quantity is called the electron's energy level. By its motion alone, the electron possesses kinetic energy, while the electron's position in orbit determines its potential energy. The total energy of an electron is the main factor that determines the radius of the electron's orbit. Electrons of an atom will appear only at certain definite energy levels (shells). The spacing between energy levels is such that when the chemical properties of the various elements are catalogued it is convenient to group several closely spaced permissible energy levels together into electron shells. The maximum number of electrons that can be contained in any shell or sub-shell is the same for all atoms and is defined as Electron Capacity = 2n2• In this equation n represents the energy level in question. The first shell can only contain two electrons; the second shell can only contain eight electrons; the third, 18 and so on until we reach the seventh shell for the heaviest atoms, which have six energy levels. Because the innermost shell is the lowest energy level, the shell begins to fill up from the shell closest to the nucleus and fill outward as the atomic number of the element increases. However, an energy level does not need to be completely filled before electrons begin to fill the next level. The Periodic Table of Elements should be checked to determine an element's electron configuration.
VALENCE ELECTRONS
Valence is the number of chemical bonds an atom can form. Valence electrons are electrons that can participate in chemical bonds with other atoms. The number of electrons in the outermost shell of the atom is the determining factor in its valence. Therefore, the electrons contained in this shell are called valence electrons.
IONS
Ionization is the process by which an atom loses or gains electrons. Dislodging an electron from an atom will cause the atom to become positively charged. This net positively charged atom is called a positive ion or a cation. An atom that has gained an extra number of electrons is negatively charged and is called a negative ion or an anion. When atoms are neutral, the positively charged proton and the negatively charged electrons are equal in number.
FREE ELECTRONS
Valence electrons are found drifting midway between two nuclei. Some electrons are more tightly bound to the nucleus of their atom than others and are positioned in a shell or sphere closer to the nucleus, while others are more loosely bound and orbit at a greater distance from the nucleus. These outermost electrons are called "free" electrons because they can be easily dislodged from the
positive attraction of the protons in the nucleus. Once freed from the atom, the electron can then travel from atom to atom, becoming the flow of electrons commonly called current in a practical electrical circuit.
ELECTRON MOVEMENT
The valence of an atom determines its ability to gain or lose an electron, which ultimately determines the chemical and electrical properties of the atom. These properties can be categorized as being a conductor, semiconductor, or insulator, depending on the ability of the material to produce free electrons. When a material has a large number of free electrons available, a greater current can be conducted in the material.
CONDUCTORS
Elements such as gold, copper and silver possess many free electrons and make good conductors. The atoms in these materials have a few loosely bound electrons in their outer orbits. Energy in the form of heat can cause these electrons in the outer orbit to break loose and drift throughout the material. Copper and silver have one electron in their outer orbits. At room temperature, a
piece of silver wire will have billions of free electrons. 
INSULATORS
These are materials that do not conduct electrical current very well or not at all. Good examples of these are: glass, ceramic, and plastic. Under normal conditions, atoms in these materials do not produce free electrons. The absence of the free electrons means that electrical current cannot be conducted through the material. Only when the material is in an extremely strong electrical field will the outer electrons be dislodged. This action is called breakdown and usually causes physical damage to the insulator.
SEMICONDUCTORS
This material falls in between the characteristics of conductors and insulators, in that they are not good at conducting or insulating. Silicon and germanium are the most widely used semiconductor materials.
Sub Module 4
SOURCES OF ELECTRICITY
Electrical energy can be produced in a number of methods. The four most common are pressure, chemical, thermal, and light.
PRESSURE SOURCE
This form of electrical generation is commonly known as piezoelectric (piezo or piez taken from Greek: to press; pressure; to squeeze) is a result of the application of mechanical pressure on a dielectric or nonconducting crystal. The most common piezoelectric materials used today are crystalline quartz and Rochelle salt. However, Rochelle salt is being superseded by other materials,
such as barium titanate. The application of a mechanical stress produces an electric polarization, which is proportional to this stress. This polarization establishes a voltage across the
crystal. If a circuit is connected across the crystal a flow of current can be observed when the crystal is loaded (pressure is applied). An opposite condition can occur, where an application of a voltage between certain faces of the crystal can produce a mechanical distortion. This effect is commonly referred to as the piezoelectric effect. Piezoelectric materials are used extensively in transducers for converting a mechanical strain into an electrical signal. Such devices include microphones, phonograph pickups and vibration-sensing elements. The opposite effect, in which a mechanical output is derived from an electrical signal input, is also widely used in headphones and loudspeakers.
CHEMICAL SOURCE
Chemical energy can be converted into electricity; the most common form of this is the battery. A primary battery produces electricity using two different metals in a chemical solution like alkaline electrolyte, where a chemical reaction between the metals and the chemicals frees more electrons in one metal than in the other. One terminal of the battery is attached to one of the metals such as zinc; the other terminal is attached to the other metal such as manganese oxide. The end that frees more electrons develops a positive charge and the other end develops a negative charge. If a wire is attached from one end of the battery to the other, electrons flow through the wire to balance the electrical charge.
THERMAL SOURCES
The most common source of thermal electricity found in the aviation industry comes from thermocouples. Thermocouples are widely used as temperature sensors. They are cheap and interchangeable, have standard connectors, and can measure a wide range of temperatures.
Thermocouples are pairs of dissimilar metal wires joined at least at one end, which generate a voltage between the two wires that is proportional to the temperature at the junction. This is called the Seebeck effect, in honour of Thomas Seebeck who: first noticed the phenomena in 1821. It was also noticed that different metal combinations have a different voltage difference. Thermocouples are utilized in aviation as ways to measure cylinder head temperatures, inter-turbine temperature and exhaust gas temperature.
LIGHT SOURCES
A solar cell or a photovoltaic cell is a device that converts light energy into electricity. Fundamentally, the device contains certain chemical elements that when exposed to light energy, they release electrons. Photons in sunlight are taken in by the solar panel or cell, where they are then absorbed by semi conducting materials, such as silicon. Electrons in the cell are broken loose from their atoms,
allowing them to flow through the material to produce electricity. The complementary positive charges that are also created are called holes (absence of electron) and flow in the direction opposite of the electrons in a silicon solar panel. Solar cells have many applications and have historically been used in earth orbiting satellites or space probes, handheld calculators, and wrist watches.
FRICTION
The production of electricity by friction refers to the build-up of static electricity when non- conductive materials are rubbed together. A transfer of electrons occurs resulting in an imbalance of charges between the materials.
MAGNETISM AND MOTION
When a conductor is moved through the magnetic lines of flux created by a magnet or electromagnet, electromotive force is created, and current flow produced for use by various electrically operated devices and components.
Sub Module 7
OHM'S LAW (RESISTANCE)
The two fundamental properties of current and voltage are related by a third property known as resistance. In any electrical circuit, when voltage is applied to it, a current will result. The resistance of the conductor will determine the amount of current that flows under the given voltage. In most cases, the greater the circuit resistance, the less the current. If the resistance is reduced, then the current will increase. This relation is linear in nature and is known as Ohm's law. By having a linearly proportional characteristic, it is meant that if one unit in the relationship increases or decreases by a certain percentage, the other variables in the relationship will increase or decrease by the same percentage. An example would be if the voltage across a resistor is doubled, then the current through the resistor doubles. It should be added that this relationship is true only if the resistance in the circuit remains constant. For it can be seen that if the resistance changes, current also changes. A graph of this relationship is shown in Figure 7-1, which uses a constant resistance of 200.  The relationship between voltage and current in this example shows voltage plotted horizontally along the X axis in values from O to 120 volts, and the corresponding values of current are plotted vertically in values from O to 6.0 amperes along the Y axis. 
Ohm's law may be expressed as an equation, as follows: Equation: 1 I = E/R
I = Current in amperes (A)
E = Voltage (V)
R = Resistance (0)
Where I is current in amperes, E is the potential difference measured in volts, and R is the resistance
measured in ohms. If any two of these circuit quantities are known, the third may be found by simple algebraic transposition. With this equation, we can calculate current in a circuit if the voltage and resistance are known. This same formula can be used to calculate voltage. By multiplying both sides of the equation 1 by R, we get an equivalent form of Ohm's law, which is: Equation: 2 E = I (R)
Finally, if we divide equation 2 by I, we will solve for resistance: Equation: 3 R = E/I.
RESISTANCE OF A CONDUCTOR
While wire of any size or resistance value may be used, the word "conductor" usually refers to materials that offer low resistance to current flow, and the word "insulator" describes materials that offer high resistance to current. There is no distinct dividing line between conductors and insulators, under the proper conditions, all types of material conduct some current. Materials offering a resistance to current flow midway between the best conductors and the poorest conductors (insulators) are sometimes referred to as "semiconductors," and find their greatest application in the field of transistors. The best conductors are materials, chiefly metals, which possess a large number of free electrons; conversely, insulators are materials having few free electrons. The best conductors are silver, copper, gold, and aluminum; but some nonmetals, such as carbon and water, can be used as conductors. Materials such as rubber, glass, ceramics, and plastics.are such poor conductors that they are usually used as insulators. The current flow in some of these materials is so low that it is usually considered zero. The unit used to measure resistance is called the ohm. The symbol for the ohm is the Greek letter omega (O). In mathematical formulas, the capital letter "R" refers to resistance. The resistance of a conductor and the voltage applied to it determine the number of amperes of current flowing through the conductor. Thus, 1 ohm of resistance will limit the current flow to 1 ampere in a conductor to which a voltage of 1 volt is applied.
FACTORS AFFECTING RESISTANCE
The resistance of a metallic conductor is dependent on the type of conductor material. It has been pointed out that certain metals are commonly used as conductors because of the large number of free electrons in their outer orbits. Copper is usually considered the best available conductor material, since a copper wire of a particular diameter offers a lower resistance to current
flow than an aluminum wire of the same diameter. However, aluminum is much lighter than copper, and for this reason as well as cost considerations, aluminum is often used when the weight factor is important. The resistance of a metallic conductor is directly proportional to its length. The longer the length of a given size of wire, the greater the resistance. Figure 7-3 shows two wire conductors of different lengths. If 1 volt of electrical pressure is applied across the two ends of the conductor that is 1 foot in length and the resistance to the movement of free electrons is assumed
to be 1 ohm, the current flow is limited to 1 ampere. If the same size conductor is doubled in length, the same electrons set in motion by the 1 volt applied now find twice the resistance; consequently, the current flow will be reduced by one-half. The resistance of a metallic conductor is inversely proportional to the cross-sectional area. This area may be triangular or even square but is usually circular. If the cross-sectional area of a conductor is doubled, the resistance to current flow will be reduced in hal£ This is true because of the increased area in which an electron can move without collision or capture by an atom. Thus, the resistance varies inversely with the cross-sectional
area of a conductor. The fourth major factor influencing the resistance of a conductor is temperature. Although some substances, such as carbon, show a decrease in resistance as the ambient (surrounding) temperature increases, most materials used as conductors increase in resistance as
temperature increases. The resistance of a few alloys, such as constantan and Manganin™, change very little as the temperature changes. The amount of increase in the resistance of a 1 ohm sample of a conductor, per degree rise in temperature above 0° Celsius (C), the assumed standard, is called the temperature coefficient of resistance. For each metal, this is a different value; for example,
for copper the value is approximately 0.004 27 ohm. Thus, a copper wire having a resistance of 50 ohms at a temperature of 0°C will have an increase in resistance of 50 x 0.004 27, or 0.214 ohm, for each degree rise in temperature above O °C. The temperature coefficient of resistance must be considered where there is an appreciable change in temperature of a conductor during operation. Charts listing the temperature coefficient of resistance for different materials are available. Figure
7-4 shows a table for "resistivity" of some common electric conductors. The resistance of a material is determined by four properties: material, length, area, and temperature. The first three properties are related by the following equation at T = 20 °C (room temperature): R= (ρ X L) / A. Where,
R = resistance in ohms
ρ = Resistivity of the material in circular
mil-ohms per foot
L = Length of the sample in feet
A = area in circular mils
RESISTANCE AND ITS RELATION TO WIRE SIZING CIRCULAR CONDUCTORS (WIRES/CABLES)
Because it is known that the resistance of a conductor is directly proportional to its length, and if we are given the resistance of the unit length of wire, we can readily calculate the resistance of any length of wire of that particular material having the same diameter. Also, because it is known that the resistance of a conductor is inversely proportional to its cross-sectional area, and if we are given the resistance of a length of wire with unit cross-sectional area, we can calculate the resistance of
a similar length of wire of the same material with any cross-sectional area. Therefore, if we know the resistance of a given conductor, we can calculate the resistance for any conductor of the same material at the same temperature. Use the following formula which basically states that the relationship between cross-sectional area, length and resistance of a certain conductor will remain the same if the size or length of the conductor is changed: .
If we have a conductor that is 1 meter long with a cross-sectional area of 1 mm2 and has a resistance of 0.017 ohm, what is the resistance of 50m of wire from the same material but with a cross-sectional area of 0.25 mm2?
System International (SI) units are commonly used in the analysis of electric circuits. However, when referencing tables and charts for conductor sizes and ohmic values, be sure denominations are for the system in which you are working. Conductors in North America are still being manufactured using the foot as the unit length and the mil (one thousandth of an inch) as the unit of diameter. Therefore, the resistance of a conductor of a given AWG size is listed on the charts with length in feet and diameter in mils. Any diameter or length in meters or cross-sectional area in square meters must be
converted to an Imperial denomination to reference the AWG chart. The conversion factors 1 mil= 0.025 4 mm and 1 foot = .304 8 meter can be applied. In the case of using copper conductors, we are spared the task of tedious calculations by using a table as shown in Figure 7-5. Note that cross-sectional dimensions listed on the table are such that each decrease of one gauge number equals a 25 percent increase in the cross- sectional area. Because of this, a decrease of three gauge
numbers represent an increase in cross-sectional area of approximately a 2:1 increase. Likewise, change of ten wire gauge numbers represents a 10:1 change in cross-sectional area - also, by doubling the cross-sectional area of the conductor, the resistance is cut in half. A decrease of three wire gauge numbers cuts the resistance of the conductor of a given length in half.
RECTANGULAR CONDUCTORS (BUS BARS)
To compute the cross-sectional area of a conductor in square mils, the length in mils of one side is squared. In the case of a rectangular conductor, the length of one side is multiplied by the length of the other. For example, a common rectangular bus bar (large, special conductor) is ¾ inch thick and 4 inches wide. The ¾-inch thickness may be expressed as 0.375 inch. Since 1 000 mils equal 1 inch, the width in inches can be converted to 4 000 mils. The cross-sectional area of the rectangular conductor is found by converting 0.375 to mils (375 mils x 4 000 mils = 1 500 000 square mils).
TYPES OF RESISTORSFIXED RESISTOR
Fixed resistors have built into the design a means of opposing current. The general use of a resistor
in a circuit is to limit the amount of current flow. There are a number of methods used in construction and sizing of a resistor that control properties such as resistance value, the precision of the resistance value, and the ability to dissipate heat. While in some applications the purpose of the resistive element is used to generate heat, such as in propeller anti-ice boots, heat typically is the unwanted loss of energy.
CARBON COMPOSITION
The carbon composed resistor is constructed from a mixture of finely grouped carbon/graphite, an insulation material for filler, and a substance for binding the material together. The amount of graphite in relation to the insulation material will determine the ohmic or resistive value of the resistor. This mixture is compressed into a rod, which is then fitted with axial leads or "pigtails." The finished product is then sealed in an insulating coating for isolation and physical protection. There are other types of fixed resistors in common use. Included in this group are:
• Carbon film
• Metal oxide
• Metal film
• Metal glaze
The construction of a film resistor is accomplished by depositing a resistive material evenly on a ceramic rod. This resistive material can be graphite for the carbon film resistor, nickel chromium for the metal film resistor, metal, and glass for the metal glaze resistor and last, metal and an insulating oxide for the metal oxide resistor.
RESISTOR RATINGS
It is very difficult to manufacture a resistor to an exact standard of ohmic values. Fortunately, most circuit requirements are not extremely critical. For many uses, the actual resistance in ohms can be 20 percent higher or lower than the value marked on the resistor without causing difficulty. The percentage variation between the marked value and the actual value of a resistor is known as the "tolerance" of a resistor. A resistor coded for a 5 percent tolerance will not be more than 5 percent higher or lower than the value indicated by the color code. The resistor color code is made up of a group of colors, numbers, and tolerance values. Each color is represented by a number, and in most cases, by a tolerance value.
When the color code is used with the end-to-center band marking system, the resistor is normally marked with bands of color at one end of the resistor. The body or base color of the resistor has nothing to do with the color code, and in no way indicates a resistance value. To prevent confusion, this body will never be the same color as any of the bands indicating resistance value.
When the end-to-center band marking system is used, either three or four bands will mark the resistor.
1. The first color band (nearest the end of the resistor) will indicate the first digit in the numerical
resistance value. This band will never be gold or silver in color.
2. The second color band will always indicate the second digit of ohmic value. It will never be gold or
silver in color.
3. The third color band indicates the number of zeros to be added to the two digits derived from the first and second bands, except in the following two cases: (A) If the third band is gold in color, the first two digits must be multiplied by 10 percent. (B) If the third band is silver in color, the first two digits must be multiplied by 1 percent.
4. If there is a fourth color band, it is used as a multiplier for percentage of tolerance, as indicated
in the color code chart in Figure 7-7. If there is no fourth band, the tolerance is understood to be 20 percent.
WIRE WOUND
Wire wound resistors typically control large amounts of current and have high power ratings. Resistors of this type are constructed by winding a resistance wire around an insulating rod, usually made of porcelain. The windings are then coated with an insulation material for physical protection and heat conduction. Both ends of the windings are then connected to terminals, which are used to connect the resistor to a circuit. A wire wound resistor with tap is a special type of fixed resistor that can be adjusted. These adjustments can be made by moving a slide bar tap or by moving the tap to a preset incremental position. While the tap may be adjustable, the adjustments are usually set at the time of installation to a specific value and then operated in service as a fixed resistor. Another type of wire-wound resistor is that constructed of Manganin wire, used where high precision is needed.
VARIABLE RESISTORS
Variable resistors are constructed so that the resistive value can be changed easily. This adjustment can be manual or automatic, and the adjustments can be made while the system that it is connected to is in operation. There are two basic types of manual adjustors. One is the rheostat and the second is the potentiometer.
RHEOSTAT
A rheostat is a variable resistor used to vary the amount of current flowing in a circuit. Figure 7-17
shows a rheostat connected in series with an ordinary resistance in a series circuit. As the slider arm moves from point A to B, the amount of rheostat resistance (AB) is increased. Since the rheostat resistance and the fixed resistance are in series, the total resistance in the circuit also increases, and the current in the circuit decreases. On the other hand, if the slider arm is moved toward point A, the total resistance decreases and the current in the circuit increases. 
POTENTIOMETER
The potentiometer is considered a three-terminal device. As illustrated, terminals 1 and 2 have the entire value of the potentiometer resistance between them. Terminal 3 is the wiper or moving contact. Through this wiper, the resistance between terminals 1 and 3 or terminals 2 and 3 can be varied. While the rheostat is used to vary the current in a circuit, the potentiometer is used to vary the voltage in a circuit. A typical use for this component can be found in the volume controls on an audio panel and input devices for flight data recorders, among many other applications. In Figure 7-19A, a potentiometer is used to obtain a variable voltage from a fixed voltage source to apply to an electrical load. The voltage applied to the load is the voltage between points 2 and 3. When the slider arm is moved to point 1, the entire voltage is applied to the electrical device (load); when the arm is moved to point 3, the voltage applied to the load is zero. The potentiometer makes possible the application of any voltage between zero and full voltage to the load. The current flowing through the circuit of Figure 7-19 leaves the negative terminal electron flow of the battery and divides, one part flowing through the lower portion of the potentiometer (points 3 to 2) and the other part through the load. Both parts combine at point 2 and flow through the upper portion of the potentiometer (points 2 to 1) back to the positive terminal of the battery. In View B of Figure 7-19, a potentiometer and its schematic are shown. In choosing a potentiometer resistance, the amount
of current drawn by the load should be considered as well as the current flow through the potentiometer at all settings of the slider arm. The energy of the current through the potentiometer is dissipated in the form of heat. It is important to keep this wasted current as small as possible by making the resistance of the potentiometer as large as practicable. In most cases, the resistance of
the potentiometer can be several times the resistance of the load. Figure 7-20 shows how a potentiometer can be wired to function as a rheostat. 
LINEAR POTENTIOMETERS 
In a linear potentiometer, the resistance between both terminal and the wiper vary linearly with the position of the wiper. To illustrate, one quarter of a turn on the potentiometer will result in one quarter of the total resistance. The same relationship exists when one-half or three-quarters of potentiometer movement. 
TAPERED POTENTIOMETERS
Resistance varies in a nonlinear manner in the case of the tapered potentiometer. Keep in mind that one-half of full potentiometer travel doesn't necessarily correspond to one-half the total resistance of the potentiometer.
THERMISTORS
The thermistor is a type of a variable resistor, which is temperature sensitive. This component has
what is known as a negative temperature coefficient, which means that as the sensed temperature increases, the resistance of the thermistor decreases.
PHOTOCONDUCTIVE CELLS
The photoconductive cell is similar to the thermistor. Like the thermistor, it has a negative temperature coefficient. Unlike the thermistor, the resistance is controlled by light intensity. This kind of component can be found in radio control heads where the intensity of the ambient light is sensed through the photoconductive cell resulting in the back lighting of the control heads to adjust to the cockpit lighting conditions.
WHEATSTONE BRIDGE
A Wheatstone ·Bridge is a useful electric wiring circuit constructed of three resistors with known values (Ri, R2, R3) and a voltmeter (VG), A fourth resistor (Rx) of unknown value is also included as shown in Figure 7-25. When wired as shown, the voltage values at D and B vary with the total resistance on each side of the "bridge". Stated another way, the ratio of R2 / R1 = Rx / R3. Thus, when the resistance on both sides of the circuit bridge are equal, there is no difference in potential at points D and B and the voltmeter wired between these points indicates "O". To find the unknown value of Rx, The equation above can be rewritten and solved for Rx as follows: Rx = R1 / R2 * R3. Alternatively, the voltage shown on the voltmeter can be used to calculate the unknown value of Rx by using Kirchoff's laws. Of primary importance is the fact that when constructed as shown, the bridge circuit is balanced between both sides when the voltmeter indicates zero. It must be noted that similar bridge circuits can be used to measure capacitance, inductance and impedance.