. Electrical Energy and Work
1.1 What factors are involved in defining work in the field of physical science?
A) Force and distance
B) Velocity and time
C) Mass and acceleration
1.2 When is work considered to be accomplished in a physical sense?
A) When a stationary object is moved
B) When a moving object changes velocity
C) When a force is applied
1.3 How is energy defined in the context of performing work?
A) The ability to do work
B) The force applied
C) The product of force and distance
1.4 What is kinetic energy?
A) Energy due to motion
B) Energy due to position
C) Energy due to elevation
2. Electrical Charges
2.1 What unit is adopted for measuring charges in electrical systems?
A) Coulomb
B) Volt
C) Watt
2.2 What is the relationship between potential difference and charges in an electrical system?
A) One coulomb of charge creates one volt of potential difference
B) One coulomb of charge creates one ampere of current
C) One coulomb of charge creates one joule of energy
2.3 According to conventional current flow, how is the direction of current assumed to be?
A) From positive to negative terminals
B) From negative to positive terminals
2.4 What is the charge of an electron?
A) +1.6 × 10^-19 C
B) -1.6 × 10^-19 C
3. Potential Difference
3.1 How is current measured in an electrical circuit?
A) Ampere (A)
B) Volt (V)
C) Ohm (Ω)
3.2 What is the unit of resistance?
A) Volt (V)
B) Ohm (Ω)
C) Ampere (A)
3.3 What term refers to the ability of a system to conduct electricity?
A) Resistance
B) Conductance
3.4 What is the charge of an electron?
A) Positive
B) Negative
3.5 According to conventional current flow, which direction does current behave as if it's flowing?
A) From positive to negative terminals
3.6 In electron flow, which terminal do electrons flow out of?
A) Positive
B) Negative
4. Electron Flow vs. Conventional Current
4.1 According to Benjamin Franklin's convention, which direction did he assume positive charge carriers to flow?
A) From positive to negative terminals
B) From negative to positive terminals
4.2 Which type of charge carriers actually constitute electron current?
A) Electrons with a negative charge
B) Protons with a positive charge
4.3 What cultural factor influences the choice between conventional flow notation and electron flow notation?
A) Geographic location and engineering practices
B) Temperature and humidity
4.4 What do engineers in the USA and solid-state physicists typically use for current flow notation?
A) Electron flow notation
Answers:
1.1 A) Force and distance
1.2 A) When a stationary object is moved
1.3 A) The ability to do work
1.4 A) Energy due to motion
2.1 A) Coulomb
2.2 A) One coulomb of charge creates one volt of potential difference
2.3 A) From positive to negative terminals
2.4 B) -1.6 × 10^-19 C
3.1 A) Ampere (A)
3.2 B) Ohm (Ω)
3.3 B) Conductance
3.4 B) Negative
3.5 A) From positive to negative terminals
3.6 B) Negative
4.1 A) From positive to negative terminals
4.2 A) Electrons with a negative charge
4.3 A) Geographic location and engineering practices
4.4 A) Electron flow notation