Sub1 
COSHH (Control of Substances Hazardous to Health) regulations require an employer to have copies of relevant Material Safety Data Sheets that are readily available to all shop personnel at all times. These data sheets allow for quick reference in case of a chemical spill or injury. Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS) provide information on hazardous materials that are present in the workplace. Furthermore, all employers must maintain current copies of the Material Safety Data Sheets for reference at any time.
Dull cutting tools present a greater threat of injury than sharp tools since a dull or improperly sharpened tool requires excessive forces to do its job. As a result, the work can be grabbed or thrown out of the machine. Therefore, always make sure the cutting tool is sharp and serviceable before you use it.
Workshops, hangars and flight lines can be very noisy places of work, according to the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), the maximum permissible continuous exposure level to steady noise in a working environment is 80dB for 8 hours.
Ear protection is optional where no noise levels are less than 80dB but is mandatory when greater than 90dB.
The wax impregnated moldable polyurethane earplugs pr vide an effective universal fit for all users and provide 30 to 35 dB of noise protection across all frequency bands.
Active noise reduction provides effective protection against low frequency noise. The electronic coupling of a low frequency noise wave with its exact mirror image cancels this noise.
The combination of earplugs with earmuffs or communication headsets is recommended when ambient noise levels are above 115dB.
All sounds have three distinctive variables: frequency, intensity, and duration. Normal conversation takes place in the frequency range from 500 to 3,000 Hz.
Daily exposure to noise levels higher than 80dB can cause hearing impairment.
Fire results from the chemical reaction that occurs when oxygen combines rapidly with fuel to produce heat, (and light). Three essentials of this process form the 'Fire Triangle'.
Fuel -A combustible material, which may be a solid, liquid or gas.
Oxygen - In sufficient volume to support the process of combustion.
Heat - Of sufficient intensity to raise the temperature of the fuel to its ignition (or kindling) point.
There are six classes of fires, each determined by the type of material that is being burned. In alphabetical, order the classes of fire are:
Class A - SOLID COMBUSTIBLE MATERIALS I.E. PAPER, WOOD, TEXTILES.
Class B - FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS I.E. PETROL, DIESEL, OIL
Class C - FLAMMABLE GASES I.E. NATURAL GAS, PROPANE.
Class D - COMBUSTIBLE METALS I.E. SODIUM, POTASSIUM, LITHIUM.
Class F - COOKING OILS/FATS I.E. DEEP FAT FRYERS.
Class E*- ELECTRICAL FIRES I.E. SHORT-CIRCUITING EQUIPMENT.
The methods of extinguishing fires have led to the development of several types of extinguishants to cater for different types of fire. These methods include Cooling the fuel, Excluding the oxygen, Separating the fuel from the oxygen.
Consideration is given here only to the extinguishants and extinguishers which conform to the EN3 Standard fire extinguisher code. The materials used in these extinguishers are Water (Water/Gas), Aqueous Film-Forming Foam (AFFF), Carbon Dioxide (CO2), Dry Powder.
WATER OR WATER/GAS EXTINGUISHERS: Water or Water/Gas extinguishers are ONLY to be used on fires involving burning solids (Class A fires). Water could cause liquid fires to spread and, obviously, using water on electrical equipment could have lethal results, so, these extinguishers must NOT be used on Class B nor on Class C fires. Water should NOT be used on burning metal (Class D) fires, as the oxygen, in the water, will cause the fires to burn more fiercely and its use could lead to violent explosions.
Aqueous Film-Forming Foam (AFFF) is best suited for Class B fires, due to its smothering and cooling action and to the fact that its finer particles will not cause the fire to spread. AFFF extinguishers can also be used on Class A fires (though its cooling action is not as effective as the water extinguishers). but, because Foam does contain water, AFFF extinguishers are considered to be NOT safe on electrical fires where high volt ages are encountered.
Carbon Dioxide (CO2) is the 'universal' fire extinguisher and, being non-corrosive. non-conductive. and leaving no residue. it is suitable for almost all types of fire. CO2 extinguishers must NOT, however, be used on Class D fires, as the extinguishant reduces the temperature very quickly, which (in a similar way to the use of water extinguishers) could cause serious explosions. Due to the fact that CO2 gas tends to dissipate quickly, the extinguisher is provided with a horn device, which helps to concentrate the CO2 at the site of the fire. This horn must NOT be held with bare hands, as the intense cold of the released CO2 will freeze the skin to the horn, resulting in severe injury to the hands.
Dry Powder is another extinguishant which is suitable for most classes of fire, and particularly those involving burning metals (aircraft wheel brake fires). It is however limited in its use on electrical fires, as the powder particles are capable of conducting high voltages (in excess of 1000 V) and, possibly, lesser voltages if they are used at distances of less than 1 metre from electrical fires. Dry Powder (in a similar way to Foam) leaves a messy residue after its use, which could present a problem to electrical contacts and circuitry.
It is the responsibility of every person at work to know: The location of the First Aid Points. The methods of calling for help. The locations of alarm bells and the siting of appropriate telephones which may be used to summon help in an emergency. The identity of the trained First Aid personnel in their vicinity. In the event of an injury (however slight), it is important that the injured person, or the attending First Aider, should complete an entry in the Accident Book, which is usually kept near the First Aid Point.
Some airplanes have Flammability Reduction System (FRS) in stalled. That is streaming of nitrogen rich gas into the fuel tank, which makes air in fuel tanks low or non-flammable. When concentration of fuel vapours is low no ignition is dangerous.
FTS implemented two additional concepts in maintenance, which assure much higher level of tank safety:
CDCCL - Critical Design Configuration Control Limitations (these are critical design features which must be maintained in order to minimize the possibility of ignition source in the fuel tanks) and
ALI - Airworthiness Limitation Inspections (these are periodic inspections of components, which by degradation could become a dangerous source of ignition)
It is most important to ensure that all persons who are engaged in the process of Fuel Tank Entry are fully trained on all aspects of the following information to ensure that all precautions are taken and all risks minimized. 
Steps which must be taken include the following: Ensure the aircraft is electrically grounded. Ensure that Fire Extinguishers are available (typically CO2 would be used for a Fuel Fire). Deactivate all Electrical Systems on the Aircraft and place required placards. Defuel the aircraft using the Aircraft Maintenance Manual Procedures. Deliver a safe atmosphere for maintenance personnel by ensuring the following: Ensure adequate ventilation. Follow recommended ventilation techniques. Properly monitor air in fuel tanks.
High volumes of fresh air will prevent a condition known as oxygen efficiency. The normal concentration of atmospheric oxygen in the air is about 21 per cent. At oxygen-deficient levels (19.5 percent and below) a person will begin to exhibit signs of oxygen starvation, including a headache, nausea, drowsiness, and slurred speech.
The approved methods of artificial resuscitation must, by law, be displayed on wall charts in workplaces.
Always use calibrated tyre gauges and make certain to use a regulator that is in good working condition. High-pressure compressed gases are especially dangerous if they are mishandled. Oxygen and nitrogen are often found in aviation maintenance shops stored in steel cylinders under a pressure of around 1,800 PSI. These cylinders have brass valves screwed into them.
Be sure the protective cap 1s screwed on a cylinder containing high-pressure gas to prevent damage to the valve when the cylinder is not connected into a system.
It is extremely important that oxygen cylinders be treated with special care. In addition to having all of the dangers inherent with other high-pressure gases, oxygen always possesses the risk of explosion and combustion. For example, you must never allow oxygen to come in contact with petroleum products such as oil or grease since oxygen causes these materials to ignite spontaneously and burn.
In the UK, gas containers use BS 381C as the standard to deter mine the correct colour and shade for each gas type. Nitrogen bottles are painted grey on the body with a black neck, whilst oxygen bottles are black with a white neck. Be aware that bottles of US manufacture use an alternative system, the main difference being oxygen bottles are painted green all over.
The transfer of high-pressure gases from a large storage bottle to the aircraft component is often called decanting and must be done at a very slow rate. If the gas is decanted rapidly the temperature of the receiving component will increase in accordance with the gas laws.
When PSUs reach their life expiry and have to be returned to their manufacturer. it is vital that all precautions are followed to make the units ·safe· for transit. PSUs get very hot when working and have caused the destruction, due to fire, of an aircraft. which was carrying these units as cargo.
Sweeping up gasoline spillage with a dry broom can cause a build-up of static electricity, with the accompanying risk of explosion.
All references to refuelling, normally, also include the action of de-fuelling and both are considered under the common term of fuelling. During any fuelling operation, in a workshop, a hangar or on the flight line, the relevant fire extinguishers must be in place.
Some materials have a mildly radioactive property, although they emit little ionising radiation in normal circumstances. These materials are sometimes referred to as 'heavy metals' and can be found in balance-weights as well as in smoke detectors, luminescent 'EXIT' signs and instruments.
Many sources of accidents on the flight line are involved with propellers and rotor blades. They are difficult to see when they are turning, and personnel (despite being familiar with the hazards of propellers and rotors), sometimes become distracted and forget about the danger. The main difference between these, and other flight-line accidents, is that they are almost always fatal.
Most blades have high-visibility markings to ensure that they can be seen when they are turning. These markings vary from a yellow blade tip marking to black and white alternate stripes along the full blade length.
For example (and allowing for the fact that there are specific rules laid down for each aircraft), installing and removing chocks should normally be done from the wing-tip direction. Boarding and leaving a helicopter should always be done from the side.
Aircraft cargo doors are usually electrically or hydraulically activated. Incorrect operation on these doors will also cause damage or injury.
All fuel spills such as fuel. oil and hydraulic fluid should be cleaned up immediately. If a fuel spill is extensive, then the airport fire service should be contacted to deal with it.
When handling electric or electronic equipment, special anti-static blanks and packaging is always used. It must be re membered that when removing and fitting these blanks, normally coloured black, care must be taken not to touch the pin connections underneath, as static discharge from the fingers, will damage the internal electronic components.
If a circuit breaker is pulled to deactivate a system, a safety tag must be attached to it to indicate this to other maintenance personnel. On no account should a circuit breaker be reactivated until the person who isolated it has been consulted.
As an example. the aerial in the nose of the aircraft should have an unobstructed 'view' of something like 30 metres, with the aerial tilted upwards. There should also be a barrier erected about 3 metres or so from the nose of the aircraft, to prevent personnel getting too close. Finally, there should be no fuelling operations in progress during the testing of weather radar.
Sub 2 WORKSHOP PRACTICES
Despite the enormous advances in the mechanisation and computerisation of the engineering industry in general. there re mains the requirement for a high degree of hand skills on the part of technicians who are engaged in the day-to-day maintenance of aircraft and their associated components.
Engineers are responsible for the maintenance of their person al tools. whilst other personnel. in designated Tool Stores. must care for all the different. specialist tools for which they have the responsibility. It is also the responsibility of engineers to ensure that any tools. or other items of equipment they use. are not left in an aircraft or associated components.
Precision instruments, however, require great care both in storage and in use. They may need to be kept in special, soft-lined, boxes within other storage facilities. Prior to use they should have a ‘zero’ check or calibration. Some tools require that they have a light coating of machine oil, to prevent the onset of corrosion.
Control of tools is important to good engineering practices and is also vital to flight safety. A variety of systems can be used to control tools but, whichever system is used, it must allow a 100% check of the tools in use before it can be considered as acceptable.
One form of control is the 'Shadow Board' and 'Tool Tag' system. Each tool is positioned over its silhouette, on the tool board. Technicians are issued with identification tokens (numbered 'tags') which are exchanged for the tool and, usually, a tag is hung above the silhouette, to be reclaimed in exchange for the tool, when it is returned to the board. The shadow board/tool tag system works equally well when the tools are held within a designated Tool Store arrangement. Even more controlled system uses Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) control of the presence of the tools. This system enables the tracking of the lost or forgotten tools and presents one of the mandatory steps before the release of the aircraft especially after Base maintenance activities.
In workshops and bays it is normal for a toolkit to be held by the department in addition to its engineers holding personal sets of tools. The tools held by the department are often referred to as 'special tools', meaning that they are only for maintenance work on the items being serviced in that workshop. A wheel bay, for example, may have sets of special spanners, levers, seal applicators and pre-set torque wrenches, which are used primarily for the servicing of particular types of aircraft wheels. This dedicated tool kit makes tool control much simpler and safer, with the tools all being clearly marked as be longing to that specific bay.
No matter where tools are being used, it is the responsibility of each technician to keep track of ALL of the tools used during a particular task. The most important check of all is the final, ' End of Work' tool check, when all tools must be collected and checked off against personal inventories, ensuring all borrowed tools (from the Tool Store for example), are returned and any personal tool tags collected.
Some materials are flammable and must, therefore, be stored outdoors. These include oils, greases, some adhesives, sealing and glazing compounds in addition to many paints, enamels and epoxy surface finishes, which are stored in metal cabinets and, usually, located (in the Northern hemisphere) on the North side of a workshop or hangar. This ensures that the cabinet re mains in the shade of the building and does not get exposed to the sun’s hot rays during the day.
Many liquids used in workshops and in the hangar have (as mentioned earlier) a fixed 'life'. This date is printed on the container and must be checked before use, because many materials are unsafe if used beyond their expiry date.
Requirements within the relevant airworthiness codes, applicable to the United Kingdom Civil Aviation Industry, such as the British Civil Aviation Requirements (BCARs), EASA Part 145, and Air Operators Certificates, prescribe that where necessary, tools, equipment and, in particular test equipment are all calibrated to acceptable standards.
In all cases, standards used are attributed upon the need for ultimate traceability to one of the following: The standard specified by the equipment manufacturer/design organisation. The appropriate National/International Standards.
External organisations, which supply an external Calibration Service, should be those holding accreditation of the National Accreditation of Measurement and Sampling.
Some tools require calibration on a regular basis, and some every time before use. As an example, micrometres would require the calibration of the zero settings using a test piece where necessary.
A record would be kept for all tools that require calibration, de tailing when last done, when next due, and the requirements of the calibration. A sticker would be attached to the tool de tailing the due date of the next calibration. This should always be checked before use, and no tool should be used if it out of calibration. Calibration records or certificates should as a minimum, contain the following information: • Identification of Equipment • Standard Used • Results Obtained • Uncertainty of Measurement • Assigned Calibration Interval • Limits of Permissible Error • The Authority under which the release document was issued • Any Limitation in the use of the equipment • Date on which each calibration was conducted.
In all cases, standards used are predicated upon the need for ultimate traceability to one of the following: The standard specified by the appliance manufacturer/design organisation, The appropriate National/International Standard, National Accreditation of Measurement and Sampling (NAMAS, United Kingdom Accreditation.
A Standard is an agreed way of doing something. It can be re corded and published formally or may simply be a company's informal unwritten procedure.
BSI British Standards is the national Standards body in the UK. It produces British Standards and ensures the representation of UK interests in European and international forums. Other NSBs include AFNOR in France, DIN in Germany and ANSI in the US.
ISO (International Organisation for Standardisation) is the world's largest developer of standards. ISO is a network of the national standards institutes of 156 countries, on the basis of one member per country, with a Central Secretariat in Geneva, Switzerland, that coordinates the system.
However, although ISO standards are voluntary. they may be come a market requirement. as has happened in the case of ISO 9000 quality management systems. or of dimensions of freight containers and bank cards.
DIMENSIONS, ALLOWANCES. TOLERANCES
Feature: Physically identifiable portion or a part. such as a hole, slot, pin, or chamfer. 
Nominal Size: An approximate dimension that is used for the purpose of general identification.
Basic Size: The theoretical size from which limits of size are derived by applying allowances and tolerances. 
Actual size: The measured size of a finished part. 
Tolerance: The total amount by which a given dimension is allowed to vary. 
Limit dimensions: The maximum and minimum dimensions of a machined part.
Bilateral Tolerance: Deviation (plus or minus) from the basic size. 
Unilateral Tolerance: Deviation in one direction only from the basic size. 
Clearance: The space between mating parts 
Interference: Negative clearance. 
Maximum Material Condition: The condition where a feature of a certain size contains the maximum amount of material within the stated limits of that size. 
Allowance: The minimum clearance space (or maxi mum interference) intended between the maximum material condition of mating parts. 
Allowance = Smallest hole - Largest Shaft.
The looseness or tightness that can result from the application of a specific combination of allowance and tolerance in the design of mating part features.
Clearance Fit: Fit that allows for sliding or rotation be tween mating parts. 
Interference Fit: A force or shrink fit which results in surface contact and surface forces due to the overlap of physical material for the entire range of tolerances between mating parts.
Transition Fit: A fit between mating parts which may be a clearance or interference fit used for accurate location of parts. 
Geometric Tolerancing: Tolerances that involve shape features of the part. 
Datum: A theoretically exact axis, point, line, or plane.